This essay is a direct result of two separate conversations with two friends with very different motivations. One of them was someone who wanted to understand the impact of weight loss drugs and whether or not they should take them and the other was trying to understand when or why we choose societal interventions over medical ones (where an obvious one exists) from a policy making perspective. 
Perhaps, the two most misunderstood facts of policy making are the role of regulatory agencies and the role of motivations for and fundings of medical research. The two are fairly related and a clear understanding of the two are key to grounding one’s opinion. 
The first is what FDA approval truly means in the context of a drug. It is important to understand that the FDA’s role is to primarily prove that a drug works (to some reasonable extent) and the side effects minimally justify the drugs presence on the market (you are not dead if you take the drug). This is might be a gross oversimplification of their stated role, but in practice, if the FDA approves a drug, you can be reasonably assured that the risks outweigh the benefits, but only in the broadest sense possible. The FDA is a regulatory authority, it is not a prescriptive authority. The FDA does not exist to tell you what to do, it exists to tell you that if you choose a drug, the drug will likely not have side effects disproportionate to its benefits. 
The second is significantly more subtle as it deals with what does not exist rather than what does. This is a shortcoming of research in general but it is particularly striking in the healthcare industry. It is best understood by framing it in the context of our fat loss medications. The large pharmaceutical industries drive the momentum of research via funding and narrative to drugs that they have successfully developed and monetized, this necessarily means that research for alternative solutions is deemphasized by lack of funding and also because that is how research works. No one really is asking the question about solving obesity via societal interventions versus a pill because 
a. the drug companies invented the drug so they fund studies that show that it works
b. there is no (there are but have an order of magnitude less funding than big pharma) body that actively asks whether a new drug has substantially more benefits than a societal intervention, precisely because there is no need to ask this question until the drug was invented.
c. there is no body that actively researches an alternative hypothesis until the drug has been discovered.
In short, big pharma loads the dice of research in favor of drugs they have already discovered and seek to monetize them. 
People generally assumed that cigarettes were good for you because of research paid for by cigarette companies. No one was really asking if cigarettes were good for you once we already had large tobacco companies, because that is not how research works, the movement from status quo takes place by the companies creating the products. Publicly funded research is generally reactive and almost by definition cannot react to every product with the same focus and intensity. So if public research is focused on cigarettes you can be sure it is not focused on sugar, processed foods etc. 
We do not really ask ourselves what the goal of medicine is in most market driven economies. Someone once asked me “Isn’t it big pharma’s job to cure diseases so that they can make the most profit? What is wrong with that?”. That question betrays a certain naivete about how market incentives align with public incentives. Big Pharma is primarily driven by profit incentives, not public health incentives. It is possible that the two are aligned but to assume they are the same is factually false. Drug companies manufacture a wide range of “products” that satisfy market demand, but two key factors here :
1. Market demand is not a good indicator of public health needs (most people are not medical professionals and would buy whatever they think they need)
1.	Whatever the market thinks they need is driven by advertising and demand stimulation (like every other industry, you buy frosted flakes not because you need it but because you think you do)
