---
title : "What does Game Theory say about voting for RFK?"
date : 2024-12-4
mathjax : true
thumbnail: gallery/thumbnails/rfk.png
cover: gallery/thumbnails/rfk.png
tags:
    - economics
categories:
    - politics
    - policy
    - opinion
---

# Introduction

It is perhaps better to start this article off by clarifying what it is
not rather than what it is. First, this is not a comprehensive review of
RFK's policies and what he stands for. Second, this is not meant to
convince you to vote one way or another. So then what the blazes did I
write this for? The motivation for this article comes from multiple
conversations with friends and family who want to know more about voting
for independents in general and RFK in particular. In this article I
will get into the following,

-   Differences between Parliamentary (such as the UK and India) and
    Winner-Takes-All Democracy (USA).

-   Splitting the vote, what it really means. Different kinds of
    potential RFK voters and why they matter.

As a recovering Game Theorist, I love to look at elections as \"games\"
and therefore I will use the word \"strategy\" a lot. A strategy in this
sense is an action (in this context voting for a candidate). In the game
theoretic structure, we assume that a player (i.e. YOU) is playing to
win. But what does it mean to win? In this context, winning means
getting policies you care about enacted. I will also address a little,
the issue of voting \"to make a point\" about the current system and why
I feel like that is a bad idea. But for the most part, I assume the
interested reader, wants to get policies they care about enacted.

# Differences in Democracy

Perhaps the least understood part of this discussion is the inherent
difference between Parliamentary democracy and Winner-Takes-All
Democracy (this is technically called Representative Democracy, but I
feel that the term obscures its meaning). Before understanding what you
should do, it is perhaps worthwhile to understand what the system you
are voting within intended for voters to think about. This could be
quite different in both systems and have vastly different implications.
Usually, the choice of system has more to do with the history and
socio-cultural context at the time of setting up the democracy. It is
very difficult to argue (vehemently, at least) for one over the other.
But certainly, one should try to understand why a particular system was
chosen and at least try to engage with viable strategies within that
system.

## Parliamentary Democracy

Consider $3$ candidates with the following vote shares and a $100$ seats
in the "Parliament" in a hypothetical parliamentary democracy (number of
seats won, in brackets).

-   KH : $41\%$ ($41$ seats)

-   DJT : $37\%$ ($37$ seats)

-   RFK : $22\%$ ($22$ seats)

In a parliamentary democracy, KH narrowly wins the election. However
(and this is a big caveat), every time a decision is needed to be made,
any one party would need to form an "alliance" with some or all of the
other parties to reach the $50\%$ mark. This means that a significant
number of independents need to be swayed in order to pass a law (by
either side). By the same token, DJT's influence is not insignificant as
they need to sway just $4$ more (than KH) independents to pass laws they
want. This system comes with a clear message to the voting population's
strategy, you can (and should, if you want to) vote for a party that is
smaller than the other two and their voice will be heard at every vote.
This system also comes with a clear disadvantage, you need to appeal to
independents at every voting instance. This is particularly worse when
you consider a situation like this,

-   KH : $49\%$ ($41$ seats)

-   DJT : $48\%$ ($37$ seats)

-   RFK : $3\%$ ($22$ seats)

In situations like this, RFK can hold up legislation that almost $49\%$
of the country wants. Bear in mind, that bills in any democracy do not
work in isolation, so RFK can hold up a super important bill (Free
Childcare) that even their $3\%$ want in exchange for a bill that
\*\*only\*\* their $3\%$ want (Bitcoin deregulation). There are two
other implications that are essential to understanding the winner takes
all situation.

The first, is that representative democracies encourage more and more
independent parties. They do this to the extent that the word
independent party loses all meaning, and there are just a large number
of parties that cater to ever more niche demographics that can sometimes
seem hilariously contradictory (Pro Environment, Pro Socialism) and
(Anti Environment, Pro Socialism).

The second, is that "winning" in a representative democracy ends up
being one of two things. You either get $51\%$ of the seats in
parliament or you form a coalition that adds up to $51\%$ using various
smaller parties. In such a coalition, parties will often "give up" a few
of their essential ideas or concepts (Environment) in exchange for
passing laws that support another (perhaps more important) essential
idea (Socialism).

Notice, that voting for more and more independent parties does not lead
to more tolerance on voting ideologies, it just means that the tolerance
on voting behavior is left up to the party representative not the
voters. Let us say you voted for a pro-Environment, Pro Socialist party
that formed a coalition with a Socialist party and gave up on
Environmental regulation. Had you known the full result of the election
in advance, you might have not have wanted to give up on
Environmentalism, you might have given up on Socialism instead. For
instance, you could think, if I cannot live in a cleaner environment I
might as well have free markets.

This paints a picture of a democracy that is very unstable. It is. Since
the resolution or tolerance between conflicting ideas takes place at the
parliament it is very difficult to gauge what issues are deal breakers
for the voting population. But over time Parliamentary democracies tend
to form $2$ major parties with a constellation of smaller parties that
reflect minor interest groups. Governments are formed by one of the two
major parties and a collection of smaller parties. We now turn to the
other case.

## Winner Takes All Democracy

It is a bit complicated to show an exact example of representative
democracy in the US, but this example is a pretty good representation.
In this example, there is no parliament, there is just a president, who
can do whatever they want for the length of their term. Consider the
vote share example as before,

-   KH : $41\%$ ($41$ seats)

-   DJT : $37\%$ ($37$ seats)

-   RFK : $22\%$ ($22$ seats)

In this example KH, can pass all the laws they want. It does not matter
that they do not have $50\%$ of the vote share. Notice, also that *more*
people did *not* want KH to be in power. Potentially *all* of RFK
supporters (more on this later) could have preferred DJT to KH had they
known the results of the election before hand.

What are the implications of this kind of democracy?

First, notice that *after* the election the elected person is
essentially a dictator. There is no need for any negotiation or working
with any other parties. This is not a bad thing, since much of the
confusion and instability of Parliamentary democracy is done away with.
Second, notice that there is a strong disincentive for other political
parties to form since even at fairly high levels of representation you
can end up with $0$ seats. Consider this example,

-   KH : $34\%$ ($41$ seats)

-   DJT : $33\%$ ($37$ seats)

-   RFK : $33\%$ ($22$ seats)

While people who voted for KH might definitely consider voting for her
again, some of the supporters of DJT and RFK might consider either :

-   Not voting at all - which is why voter turnout is such an issue in
    the US elections

-   trying to persuade DJT to accept them into their party and fight for
    change in some of it's core values (maybe considering the
    environment more).

# Summary of Differences in Democracy Styles

The key take away is that in both systems you have to eventually
reconcile your differences to reach that $51\%$ mark. In the
Parliamentary system you leave it up to the person you vote for, no
matter how small their party is. But in the Winner Take All system, you
have to do it yourself, or you risk coming away with nothing (hence the
Winner Takes ALL!). Again, either way, some (or most) of your ideologies
will be resolved to reach a decision.

# Opinion : So What Should You Do?

Well, one thing is clear, since the US is a Winner Take All system you
should reconcile your differences with the major parties and place your
vote there. While it was not clear to me why this system was chosen in
the US, it seems that the pressure of reconciling one's differences is
on oneself. This system is perhaps why we have a two party system in the
first place. The motivation for a voter to vote for an independent is
very low (but there is one situation in which it makes sense, more on
that later) to the point that it has prevented the formation of more
parties. Which is why it is ironic that many independents run on a
ticket of plurality of opinion but do not actually advocate to change
the actual voting system so that more political parties are motivated to
coalesce around different combinations of ideas.

# Implications for Reconciling Differences

If you are reading this far it means you are at least considering voting
for the major parties. One thing is clear when reconciling your
differences, you need to figure out which party you would vote for if
your top choice did not exist. Thus two kinds of voters exist,\
$RFK \succ KH\succ DJT$\
from voting for $RFK \succ DJT\succ KH$\
Where, $\succ$ means is that if $a\succ b$ you prefer $a$ to $b$. For
instance, if after casting your vote for RFK and seeing he lost you
would rather DJT won (had you known RFK would not have won), that means
DJT is your second choice. Thus, imagine a world in which RFK lost and
think about who you would have preferred. That is who you should vote
for.\
There is however, one (and only) situation in which you should vote for
RFK and that is the situation in which you are truly indifferent between
DJT and KH. That is, on the day after the election you truly did not
care if RFK lost. I think that such candidates are likely to be of two
kinds.

\- Non-voters : They would probably have not voted any way. If you are
going to vote if RFK was not running then this is NOT you. -
Ideologically inconsistent : Since independents and RFK generally seek
to appeal to both parties and therefor take centrist positions, it is
not possible for someone to be truly indifferent between KH and DJT.

# Strategic Implications

Interestingly, it is in the interest of the party that thinks they will
lose to promote the independent candidate. In the current political
climate it seems that both parties view themselves as the potential
loser and hence both are quite wary of RFK.\
Equally as interesting is that most people who find RFK worth engaging
with voted for DJT in the previous two elections, this demographic is
notorious for misreporting who they voted for the previous two
elections. This makes even more sense, since if you did have
preferences, of the form $RFK \succ DJT\succ KH$, it makes sense to
claim that you will vote for RFK and promote him as much as possible in
order to ensure his legitimacy and viability as a candidate. But more
importantly preventing candidates with the preference of
$RFK \succ KH\succ DJT$ from reconciling differences and voting for KH.